Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu is under pressure to set out a
post-war plan for Gaza his political
rival Bennie gun has given Netanyahu a
June 8th deadline to produce one or he's
threatening to quit the government for
years a two-state solution for
Palestinians has been at the center of
Middle East peace efforts but it's been
a difficult road map to
follow this is Gaza in Ruins after 8
months of War but there are plans to
rebuild it the so-called day after when
the war ends Israel's biggest Ally the
US wants Israelis Palestinians and
Regional governments to take steps
towards establishing an independent
Palestinian State side by side with
Israel the two states solution is as old
as the state of Israel itself in 1947
the United Nations Drew up a plan for
Israeli and Palestinian Nations the
territory marked here in red would be
Palestinian that in Gray would be
Israeli but those plans were rejected by
Arab states British occupying forces
pulled out in 1948 and Israel was
founded triggering a war with its Arab
neighbors hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians were expelled from their
homes the war and its aftermath pushed
the founding of any Palestinian State
into the future in 1967 another war with
its neighbors left a Victorious Israel
in control of all the land between the
River Jordan and the Mediterranean the
the beginning of its occupation of
Palestinian
lands starting in the 1990s there was a
diplomatic push for a longterm peace
deal where Israel would allow a
Palestinian state in exchange for
security
guarantees the proposed state was
already much smaller than in
1947 it would include the West Bank East
Jerusalem and
Gaza but there are many obstacles to
establishing even this diminished
Palestinian state right now Israel's
wartime government led by prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu is in charge of a
Nation still in shock after hamas's
Terror attacks of October 7th Netanyahu
has repeatedly said that an independent
Palestine would result in more terror
attacks and has vowed to block
it then there's the issue of Israeli
settlements in the West Bank these
communities and outposts are illegal
under International and Israeli law but
receive government protection they take
up much of the land that would be part
of a Palestinian
State other disagreements are also not
easy to solve both sides dispute who
should control Water Supplies many
Palestinians want a right to return to
their homes that they lost in 1948 in
Israel itself and both sides claim
Jerusalem as their Capital but the city
is cut off from the rest of the West
Bank by a wall
of all these obstacles the biggest may
be the mood in Israel Netanyahu may be
unpopular but public opinion polls show
overwhelming opposition to a Palestinian
state in the meantime one idea is an
International Coalition that would
administer Gaza temporarily on route to
it becoming part of a Palestinian State
along with the West
Bank my next guest joined fata the party
which controls the Palestinian Authority
in the West Bank at the age of just 14
he spent 5 years in an Israeli prison
for violence during the first in today
he says he sees a way to end the
conflict in the Middle East I'm happy to
Welcome to the program Palestinian
activist Sama Sela Mr singala it's good
to have you with us an end to this
fighting and peace between the
Palestinians and the Israelis how do you
propose both sides get to that place
well thanks a lot for inviting me uh I
think you know we are passing very hard
days
today the public mood is very much
confused there is a cocktail of uh
feelings anger uh sadness grieve uh so
the public mood is is in a very bad uh
position today so but yet when this war
will end the Palestinians and is
Israelis will realize that there are in
this piece of land 7 million
Palestinians and 7 million Jews and they
are living in the same land and they
need to find a way to coexist and I
think there is only one way to achieve
this goal because apparently the most
important issue for the Israelis is to
be able to live in a Jewish Democratic
State and to achieve this they need to
separate from the million of
Palestinians so the only option that is
practical and this is still applicable
is the two step solution if we take this
two solution outside what is left on the
table what will be left on the table
it's is an aparti which nobody is
willing to to be there so I think it's
in the best interest of the Israelis and
in the best interest of the palestin to
is to achieve the two- step solution and
this is a solution that is endorsed by
the the International Community let me
ask you Mr
singel let me just ask you though you
know what the the polls what public
opinion is in Israel right now so why do
you think Israelis would ever be on
board and and you know support the plan
that you're supporting this two-state
solution what do you think is going to
change in in the mindset of
Israelis I know Israelis very well I
have been in dialogue with the Israelis
for the last 30 years and I talk to
Israelis is from the left from the
center and from from the right and
sometimes I tell them I I know you
better than you know yourselves because
they don't talk to each other I talk to
all of them MH let's take the example of
uh 1973 the war when Egypt launched the
war against Israel the whole public
opinion in Israel was anti- Egyptian
they hated the Egyptian there was a lot
of anger against Egypt and then when
Sadat decided to come and have his visit
to the keset and addressed the Israelis
in a
straightforward speech that was calling
for co co coexistence that was calling
for reconciliation that he offered peace
the Israelis all signed in he changed
the public opinion in one night this
could be happened now also in our case
now between the Israelis and
Palestinians what we are lacking here is
leadership unfortunately we have lack of
leadership on both sides I want to ask
you about that if we have leaders let me
ask you about that in just a second Mr
zela about about leadership um but let
let's talk about the current War right
now would it be in Israel's interest to
end this war you know there are calls
for a ceasefire would it be in Israel's
interest um to end this war if Hamas has
not been
destroyed well we need to put realistic
targets for this war and eight months
now and it has been clear that there is
no military solution for Hamas Hamas
cannot be defeated completely through
this war nobody expected that this war
will go for eight months and it was
clear that the Israelis have used their
maximum power in this world and there
was full support from the International
Community from the Americans the
ammunition the the the arms were
supported to Israel I mean Israel had
everything that it needs military to to
defeat Hamas but they couldn't leave
they couldn't reach there so you think
it's possible done now do you think it
do you think it's possible though I mean
do you agree with the Israeli government
Hamas must be destroyed if if we want to
let this war for another 10 years with
this number of huge civilian casualties
on the Palestinian side yes maybe but I
think nobody wants to allow this price I
mean Israel has given a chance to
achieve military what whatever they can
do but I'll tell you how Hamas can be
defeated Hamas can be defeated if we
stop the war now release the Israeli
hostages and start a process of
reconstruction and start a process of
maybe isolating Gaza from Israel but
opening Gaza to the world having a
relief having hope for Palestinians 2.3
million Palestinians are now uh very
much sensitive from the destruction that
Hamas brought upon them they would like
to see a way of construction of Hope and
they would sign in this is the way that
we can let me pick up I want to pick up
on that you you're calling for Hamas to
release the Israeli hostages you've
condemned the attack on Israel October
7th um why hasn't Palestinian Authority
president mmud Abbas or any other
Palestinian leader for that matter um
why haven't they condemned the
atrocities of October 7th
because I think he has he hasn't the
vision of of a leader he hasn't the the
capability to understand what was the
moment at that time what was his
obligation at that time and he did not
only maybe disappoint the International
Community on on this he keeps
disappointing the Palestinian people on
a lot of issues this this man was
elected for a term of four years on 2005
that ended in 2009 and he continued to
self- employ himself until today this
man controls completely everything the
Executive Branch the legislative branch
he he controls the judicary system the
media the diplomacy the money he
controls
everything and he is 90 years old and
you can imagine each task of these needs
a a team of 30 40 young Palestinians to
be able to perform well so he's holding
everything in his hands and his per
performance is very negative so he is is
not capable to do any good job not only
to assess what he should be should be
doing on the 7th of October or later
let's talk about you know if someone
were to replace him um considering what
has happened in the last eight months
it's feasible to think that the
Palestinians maybe would choose someone
who's even harder on Israel much more
radical I mean do you not worry that
replacing him would only make the
conflict worse I mean many many of the
allies of the Palestinians as well as
the Israelis consider aboss to be a safe
Pair of
Hands well this is uh
completely this is completely
disconnected from the reality the
Palestinian people are upset they are
not happy from the corruption that Abbas
brought upon them in the West Bank and
from the destruction that Hamas brought
upon them in Gaza most of the
Palestinians the majority of
Palestinians would like to see an
alternative that brings hope and
construction an alternative that will be
able to work with the Israelis on some
kind dynamics that will benefit both the
Israelis and Palestinians we need to
bring up a strategy from the Palestinian
side that puts that puts the Israeli
security at its basis from our own
interest and then maybe we will persuade
the isra Isis to bring up a strategy
that will put the human dignity and
well-being and National aspiration of
the Palestinians at its basis these two
strategies can help the Palestinians and
Israelis
Rec step by step let me ask you before
we we've got just about a minute left um
is there someone who is an obvious
replacement for
mudas is there someone that you would
recommend there
is yes there is a generation of
leadership the younger Generations that
abas have been blocking them to to
participate in in in in leading the
Palestinian people including for example
Muhammad dlan who lives in Exile now
Abbas deported him and Dr Nas he is the
strongest candidate to have a
unification government that can have the
respect of the street and the
International Community and also the
trust of the Israelis we need to have a
candidate like these people who are able
to have the trust of the Palestinian
people and work in in in in in
cooperation with the Israelis and the
International Community Mr singel
unfortunately we're out of time but I
appreciate you taking the time to talk
with us and I appreciate you being very
forthright and open with us thank
you thank you let's get more from
Israeli Peace activist gon Basin he's
also an author and negotiated with Hamas
for the release of Israeli soldier
gillad Shalit back in 2011 welcome Mr
Basin Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu in January flatly rejected the
idea of a Palestinian state that means
the two-state solution is dead isn't
it no the most surprising outcome of
this war that we're seeing this horrible
war in Gaza is that the two-state
solution is back on the table more than
perhaps it's ever been before we've been
talking about a two-state solution for
more than 30 years it is true that in
the last years it seemed that it was no
longer viable but it's back on the table
and increasing numbers of countries
around the world which have yet to
recognize the state of Palestine or the
state of Israel are doing that and this
is going to push both Israel and
Palestine to the table in a regional
framework we we have something else that
developed during this war is we saw the
creation of a regional defense Alliance
that defended Israel on the night that
Iran attacked it these are all opening
up possibilities for a renewed disc of
the two-state solution and turning it
into something that is viable you say
that the two-state solution is back on
the table but is it back on the table of
benam in Netanyahu because he is clearly
opposed to it and also it appears that
the majority of Israelis are also
opposed to the plan therefore I ask
again based on this it would appear that
the two-state solution in Israel is
dead right well I I think we should be
realistic and look at the fact that
public opinion during war time is is
slanted it it's not accurate it doesn't
really assess what the public may think
the day after the war right now people
are traumatized both in Israel and in
Palestine and with regard to Mr natano
Mr natano is history it's just a matter
before he's thrown out of office in new
elections or in some other way that will
happen here because nany is blamed by
the majority of Israelis for what led to
October 7th and for the mismanagement of
the war since October 7th he is a lost
most of his base and I think that very
few people think that he actually has a
chance of coming back to Power after we
have new elections in Israel and the
people of Israel are demanding new
elections minister in his government
Benny gun has threatened to walk out of
the government by Saturday if his
Sixpoint plan for the day after in Gaza
isn't approved you are saying that the
Netanyahu government will fall if he
does
so no Natan still has a clear majority
in the government even if Gans leaves
the government but I think once Gans
leaves the government if he does there
will be even more massive demonstrations
taking place in Israel by the Israeli
public calling for an end to this
government there are voices within the
Hardline Coalition of nany who believe
that they will Faire better after
elections and they may Bolt the
government there's going to be increased
International pressure particularly from
the United States on the Natan
government to accept the plan that the
Natan government put out on the table
for the return of these ready hostages
and a ceasefire and an end to the war as
the United States wants and the whole
world wants an end to this war so yes I
think that the increasing pressure is
going to eventually lead to the fall of
this government and and this is what we
in Israel who believe in peace need to
work for let's talk about uh peace and
in particular the the two-state solution
because uh Benny Gans has also talked
about um a a governing alternative for
Gaza and you have also suggested in a
blog that you wrote for the Times of
Israel that it should be the Palestinian
Authority will Hamas accept
this right I didn't say the Palestinian
Authority I actually said members of the
opposition to the current Palestinian
Authority mainly from the fat party it
has to be authorized by president abas
but president abas and his authority
cannot govern Gaza they can't send
anyone to Gaza it needs to be
Palestinians who come from Gaza who live
in Gaza
as well as other Palestinians who are
respected and have
legitimacy amongst the Palestinians no
non-palestinian body can govern Gaza
without being looked at by the
Palestinian people as another form of
occupation so it really has to come from
within Palestine they need to determine
what kind of peacekeeping force can be
brought to to Gaza probably an Arab LED
peacekeeping force that will enable and
force Israel to withdraw from Gaza
Israel cannot remain in Gaza this should
be clear clear to everyone after Israel
had 18 years experience of fighting
Insurgency in Lebanon there is no
sustainable solution for Israel to
remain in Gaza does this plan assume
that there will be no Hamas in Gaza and
therefore there will be somebody in Gaza
who can represent the Palestinian people
in
Gaza no Hamas is not disappearing let's
be realistic about this Hamas is part of
Palestinian Society it is the
Palestinian people's challenge how to
disarm Hamas how to make Hamas into a
legitimate member of the government or
the
polity I I do not Envision any kind of
acceptable government acceptable by the
International Community acceptable by
the Arab states by Egypt and Jordan and
Saudi Arabia and the Emirates and others
that would be governed by Hamas Hamas is
the voice of yesterday Hamas is a
Palestinian problem and the Palestinian
people need to determine how to
integrate a legitimate Islamic political
party into their governance but it
cannot be an armed militia within a
state which is being called a sovereign
state and being recognized as such as a
state they have a
responsibility and an obligation to
international law and to being a just
and legitimate member of the community
of Nations which means that they cannot
have a an armed militia within their
borders we'll leave it there for the
moment thanks so much for joining us
today Israeli Peace activist garan
Baskin thank you
sir thank you